---
title: 'Demystifying measure-theoretic probability theory (part 1: probability spaces)'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/measure_theory_1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

Summary
-----

In this series of posts, I will present my understanding of some basic concepts in measure theory — the mathematical study of objects with “size”— that have enabled me to gain a deeper understanding into the foundations of probability theory.


As a computer science undergraduate student, I was taught the basic and incomplete version of probability theory in which discrete outcomes (e.g. a dice roll) are treated quite differently from continuous outcomes (e.g. the temperature outside).  For example, the expectation of a discrete random variable $X$ is given by. 

$$E(X) := \sum_x P(X=x)$$  

whereas if $X$ is continuous its expectation is given by    

$$E(X) := \int_x x \ f(x) \ dx$$

where $f(x)$ is $X$'s density function. 

Not only did I find this division to be unsatisfying, but as I continued to study statistics and machine learning through grad school, I found it to be inadequate for a deeper understanding into the workings of the topics that I was studying. 

I learned that this division, between continuous and discrete distributions, is actually a bridge over a deeper and more complete theory of probability, based on measure theory, that not only unifies the discrete and continuous scenarios, but also extends them. 

In fact, I was surprised to learn that the very formal definition of probability requires measure theory! It is as if the very first step into probability plunges one into a crevice of mathematics. It is no wonder why teachers build a bridge to cross this crevice and avoid measure theory altogether. Sadly, this bridge comes at the cost of a less satisfying, and more tedious explanation of probability.

A measure theoretic foundation for probability
------

I'll introduce a bunch of terms in my definition for probability and in the following sections, we will define and discuss each of them. 

A probability space is a measure space ($\Sigma$, $E$, $P$) where $P(\Sigma) = 1$. 
The set $\Sigma$, is called the sample space.  
The sigma-algebra over $\Sigma$, denoted $E$, called the set of events.
The measure $P$ for the measureable space $(\Sigma, E)$ is the probability measure.

Sigma-algebra? Measure space? Let's introduce each of these ideas, and then we will come back to this full three-part definition.

