---
title: 'Introducing matrices'
date: 2020-11-24
permalink: /posts/matrices/
tags:
  - tutorial
  - mathematics
  - linear algebra
  - matrices
---

THIS POST IS CURRENTLY UNDER CONSTRUCTION

Matrices are a fundamental concept in linear algebra and are ubiqutous across nearly every field of science and engineering.  In my opinion, matrices are introduced to students in a myopic way that hides the many ways that matrices are interpreted and utilized.  

The problem is that matrices can be viewed through multiple lenses; however, when they're first introduced, they are introduced through only one lense. This is likely a concious strategy to avoid overwhelming students; however, at least for me, this approach brought more confusion than it would have otherwise.  

How are matrices introduced?  Sometimes, matrices are introduced as simply, "a rectangular array of numbers," as is the case in the [Wikipedia entry on matrices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_(mathematics)).  In other cases, such as in the linear algebra course I took as a college sophomore, matrices were introduced as datastructures for efficiently encoding systems of linear equations. For example, the system of linear equations

$$\begin{align*}2x_1 + 4x_2 &= 6 \\ x_1 - 3x_2 &= 2\end{align*}$$

could be encoded as the *coefficient matrix*

$$\begin{align*}\begin{bmatrix}2 & 4 \\ 1 & 3\end{bmatrix}\end{align*}$$

or as the *augmented matrix*

$$\begin{align*}\begin{bmatrix}2 & 4 & 6 \\ 1 & 3 & 2\end{bmatrix}\end{align*}$$

After this explanation, I was left to wander: *okay, but what IS a matrix?* That is, I knew that there was something much deeper than simply an efficient storage mechanism for a bunch of simple, linear equations. It wasn't until I started using linear algebra in practice, did I truly start to get a handle on what they are. 

However, I wonder if matrices were better explained at the outset, I would have been set up to understand them much better at the start. This blog post is an attempt at such an introduction.

What *IS* a matrix?
-------------

So what *are* matrices?  Well, as I discuss in my [previous blog post](https://mbernste.github.io/posts/understanding_3d/) some concepts require viewing at multiple angles to grasp their true nature. I think matrices are one of those concepts.

These three main angles to view a matrix are:

1. The most simple and least abstract way to view a matrix is simply as a two-dimensional array of values. That is, a table. 
2. Getting a little bit more abstract, a matrix can also be viewed as a collection of vectors in a finite dimensional [vector space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space).
3. The most abstract way to view a matrix is as an encoding of a *function* between vector spaces.  Specifically, a matrix can be used to encode a [linear functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_map) between finite-dimensional vector spaces. It is this abstract angle of viewing matrices that lies at the core of the mathematical field of linear algebra.  

In real world use, some matrices are used to represent a table of data, some matrices represent a collection of vectors, some matrices represent linear functions, and some matrices represent *all three*.  Using matrices in practice often requires mentally switching between all three of these ways of viewing/interpreting matrices.  

Toy example: Markov chains
-----------

For the remainder of the blog post, I'll use [Markov chains](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_chain) as an example application of matrices that illustrates how one often requires jumping between the three angles of viewing matrices. 
