

With the advent of single-cell genomics, researchers are nwo able to probe molecular biology at the single-cell level.  That is, scientists are able to measure some aspect of a cell, such as its transcriptome (RNA-seq) or its open chromatin regions (ATAC-seq), for thousands, and [sometimes even millions]() of cells, at a time. These new technologies have brought about new efforts for to map and catalogue all of the cell types in the human body.  The premier effort of this kind is the [Human Cell Atlas](https://www.humancellatlas.org), an international consortium of researchers who have set themselves on the journey towards creating "comprehensive reference maps of all human cells—the fundamental units of life—as a basis for both understanding human health and diagnosing, monitoring, and treating disease".

Of course, before one begins to catalogue cell types, one must define what they mean by "cell type".  This has become a topic of hot debate.  Before the age of single-cell genomics, a rigorous definition was usually not necessary. Colloquially, a cell type is a category of cells in the body that performs a certain function. Commonly, cell types are considered to be relatively stable.  For example, a neuron in one's brain will, as far we know, not spontaneously morph into a liver cell.

Unfortunately, researchers found that a such a fuzzy definition does suffice as a foundational definition from which one could go on to create "reference maps".  One reason for this is that the resolution provided by single-cell technologies enables one to find clusters of similar cells, that one may deem to be a "cell type" at ever more extreme resolutions.  For example, [Svennson et al. (2021)](https://academic.oup.com/database/article/doi/10.1093/database/baaa073/6008692) found that as researchers measure more cells, they tend to find more "cell types": 

https://academic.oup.com/view-large/figure/215753221/baaa073f5.tif
